Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
Although he appeared in print for the first time in 1969 with a short story in the Science Fiction Magazine,
the novel was serialized in astounding science fiction starting in 1972, then released as a book in 1974.
The Forever War is similar to Robert Heinlein's book Starship Troopers, in that both have intergalactic war,
powered body armor, and highly advanced weapons as common elements.
Differences between the books show up in the way the authors treat war.
Heinlein's conflict was sort of a John Wayne style battle with the bad guys,
whereas Haldeman's dealt with the emotions and reactions of his characters to the war they fought.
We asked Haldeman if the resemblance was intentional.
Well, there was no intention on my part.
In fact, I didn't realize until I was about 70 or 80 pages into the book that many of the details were similar to Starship Troopers.
Somebody else pointed that out when he read the manuscript.
I wasn't doing an answer to Heinlein's book.
I thought Heinlein's book was admirable in many ways, even though we have diametrically opposed philosophies.
But if there's any relation to any book, it is to my own first novel, War Year,
because it's an expansion into a science fiction universe of the notions that I was trying to express in mainstream novel.
Haldeman has a background in physics and astronomy and told us about how he uses his hard science background in his work.
Well, I try to use it to make the worlds that are in the event more believable,
at least to me, since I do have a background in science and engineering.
I think, well, the writer has to at least suspend his own disbelief while he's making up these stories.
It's easier for me to do it if it's on a fairly solid scientific foundation,
even though my science is rather old fashioned and probably rather sloppy by a real scientist's standards.
It's still enough to convince me, so it's fulfilled its function.
In the Forever War, the soldiers experience time dilation when they travel to and from the war zone.
That means that due to the tremendous velocity of their spaceships, dozens of years have passed on Earth,
while only a few months have passed for the soldiers on the spaceships.
Haldeman told us how he used hard science to evoke some of the feeling the soldiers have.
It goes deeper than just description, the time dilation in the Forever War,
though it's scientifically accurate, its main function is metaphorical,
and that is to demonstrate how the soldiers who fight a war become isolated from the culture that they're supposed to be protecting.
He was using a science-fictional device to exaggerate something that happened to every soldier.
I remember when I came back from Vietnam, I was suddenly plunged into what was an alien culture,
even though I'd only been a soldier for two years.
A lot of things had changed, and it's not a great thing to come back.
There were no victory parades, and that sort of thing.
Join us next time when we continue our interview with Joe Haldeman.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and David Cruz.
Today we'll be continuing our interview with author Joe Haldeman.
It was mentioned in the previous program that Haldeman served in Vietnam and uses that experience in some of his stories.
For instance, in one of his stories, he tells of a soldier who is severely hurt by a laser mine.
We asked Haldeman if that was drawn from his own experiences.
We wondered if he was exercising demons by writing about that experience.
We asked if being in Vietnam had any other effects on his writing.
Haldeman has written two novels and edited one anthology, all dealing with war.
But by no means should you consider the fact that Haldeman is a writer.
That's right, he writes about what happens to people who are placed in that type of violent situation.
He seems to be exploring what makes his characters tick more than the situations surrounding the characters.
One of the themes in his work is man or mankind being changed when facing conflict.
We asked Haldeman to respond to that.
I think it's obvious that confronting death on a daily basis changes people.
Sometimes radically for the worse, and that people who are totally dehumanized by war.
But speaking racially, I don't think you could make such a broad statement.
What's behind some of the things I'm writing is the hope that human nature eventually may improve to the point where we won't have wars.
We find other ways to settle our differences.
In his novel All My Sins Remembered, the main character is red-taped and shuffled into doing something that he is diametrically opposed to.
When he rebels against the situation, he is terminated.
The story is about a bureaucracy that totally takes over a man's identity.
And he doesn't really exist except as a tool for that bureaucracy.
When he becomes an efficient tool, he's scrapped.
The main character ends up being a spy for the government and carrying out covert operations for them.
And he goes more or less against his will, that is to say, through very advanced techniques of conditioning.
He's turned into a thoroughly different person.
He was a Buddhist, a pacifist when he started out.
He did not get the job he signed up for.
They twisted him around into being a killing machine.
If all this makes Haldeman sound like a pessimist, well, he's not that either.
Join us next time when we find out more about Joe Haldeman.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show
is a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
and the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And David Cruz. Today we continue our interview with author Joe Haldeman.
So far in our conversation with Haldeman, we've discussed how he used his experiences in Vietnam in his writing and some of his early works.
Now we're going to look at his writing style and two particular stories.
A short story to Howard Hughes' A Modest Proposal and a novel, Mindbridge.
Haldeman tells these stories by using narratives by the main characters in the stories, reports by them and others,
portions of books written long after the time set in the story, and other non-standard writing techniques.
We asked him if he got the ideas for this type of style when he was attending the Iowa Writers Conference.
Oh, not really. The connection is with John Doe's process. Thanks, David.
I read the U.S. H. Reliative some years before at Mindbridge and really was impressed by the way it worked and thought it worked really well in science fiction.
So I tried it out in a rather long short story, to Howard Hughes' A Modest Proposal.
And it looked like it would work, so I went ahead and applied it to Mindbridge.
I did do most of that book while I was studying at Iowa, and that's why I did a case.
The authors at the Iowa Writers Conference were, for the most part, not science fiction writers.
We asked Haldeman about their reaction to his being a science fiction author.
Well, they were a little apprehensive about it. See, they didn't know I was a science fiction writer when I joined the workshop.
So I joined on the basis of my first novel, which was not science fiction.
And some of them were outwardly hostile towards science fiction, such as Stanley Elkham.
Others were anywhere between apprehensive and slightly sympathetic.
Stephen Becker, one of them, had actually had a few pieces in the magazine, Fantasy and Science Fiction.
In general, though, they thinly disguised the attitude that this stuff was just commercial fiction, and therefore beneath contempt.
That's an attitude I've never understood. Some of the world's finest literature is science fiction.
We asked Haldeman what he thought about that type of attitude.
But the field is judged by its worst, not by its best.
And people like that think of science fiction, they think in terms of great D-movies and Lousy television.
They've never read much of the best of the field.
Using science fiction is possible to consider various aspects of mankind's future, and science fiction is the only literary form to speculate about the future.
We asked Haldeman if he thought that mankind might be radically different in the future.
I think it's quite possible, even say within the span of a century,
so many of the things that determine human nature are things that can be mitigated by technology, such as the problem of dying so soon.
That is, it's possible that in a couple of generations, being to live a century, two centuries, maybe a thousand years, maybe as long as you care to,
that will radically change human nature because it will take the pressure off of individuals.
The other or other less so sanguine notions is possible that the sciences of communication will grow into a kind of sophisticated mind control.
It will be difficult for the individual to know exactly what is his idea and what has been induced by his own society.
Sort of a sophisticated life-long brainwashing doesn't seem too unlikely, and you can argue that it's happening now.
Join us next time when we wrap up our interview with Joe Haldeman and find out how he got involved with Star Trek.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and David Cruz, and today we're going to wrap up our interview with author Joe Haldeman.
Haldeman has been involved in two multi-book series, one called Atar the Merman and the other was Star Trek from the TV series.
Although he enjoyed writing the first of his three Atar books, the ones that followed had nowhere to go to expand the characters.
The publisher was banking on the current popularity of Dolphins and Whales, but the series never took hold and Haldeman's third book was never published.
The Star Trek novels were a different sort of challenge, as Haldeman explains.
I apologize for being like a vulture circling over the corpse, but I asked whether anybody was picking up Jim's work, and he said why don't you give it a try.
Jim was taking the scripts from the TV show and just turning them into short stories, whereas they wanted me to do what Jim would have done if he had lived, which was a bright original novel around the Star Trek characters.
Writing these novels was more than just sitting down and coming up with something for Spock, McCoy, and Kirk to do. Haldeman had to work out some other problems first.
One of Haldeman's latest projects is a trilogy, of which the first book, Worlds, is already out.
Haldeman gave us a little background on that novel.
It's essentially the story of a woman who grew up, was born and grew up on a space colony, a space settlement, and is sent to Earth for a year of postgraduate work or finishing, if you want to call it that.
Haldeman is being set up for a political position as a liaison between this world and Earth, and various strange things happened to her in the year that she's here.
It seems as if a lot of authors are writing trilogies these days, and we wondered why Haldeman decided to write one.
Well, it seems like an awfully big thing to put into one book.
It looks as if each volume of the trilogy will be longer than any other book ever written.
At least a third, each one so indeed, would have done, or nearly a half million words long, which are rather difficult to sell.
And I just, you know, everybody's doing trilogies, so I can't idea what trilogy to do, it's part of it. They're very successful, second and third books have a built-in audience.
Also, I wanted to try something big.
And that's as good a reason as any. We've discussed in the previous sections of this interview that Haldeman's main concern is storytelling. He develops interesting characters and sets them in a believable scientific background.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy. And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson.
What makes science fiction a separate branch of literature? Why is it distinct from so-called mainstream or regular literature, and should it be?
We ask science fiction author Jack Chalker if mainstream writing and science fiction are essentially different.
No, they aren't. There's no way that you can. It is rather odd, though. It's an ambivalent answer.
Clifford Simac once said that there is some difference because science fiction writers, you will find writing every other form of literature.
The magic mysteries, romances, mainstream war novels, you name it. But when people who write other things train right science fiction, they usually fall flat on their face.
But there really isn't that much difference. An awful lot of people write an awful lot of stuff.
And some of it, a great deal of it is science fiction and fantasy, whether or not it's categorized that way.
It's the ghettoization of strictly a marketing thing.
Another science fiction figure, Frederick Paul, who's been an editor, agent and writer, and who knows the field as few other people do, agrees that it's a publishing industry that keeps science fiction separate.
Well, the publishing industry is responsible for that. And in some ways it's a bad thing. A lot of people in this world like to read books, but are prejudiced against anything that has to word science fiction on it.
I think it's, I forgot the person who wrote the poem, his little poem about it, which says something like, if it's science fiction, I don't like it.
And if I like it, it can't possibly be science fiction, because there are a great many science fiction novels that everybody loves.
They just don't admit they're science fiction. They've brave new world in 1984.
But I don't mind that. I'm perfectly willing to have the word science fiction on the cover of any book I write.
It's only a sort of geographical designation. It's the name they put on the shelves where the books appear, that the people who like to write my, read my books are going to go.
Jack Williamson has been writing science fiction for well over half a century, and he shares Poles pride in being recognized not just as a writer, but as a science fiction writer.
I'm not enthusiastic about consolidating mainstream literature and science fiction, but I also remember that there was a time when science fiction wasn't walled off in a category by itself.
And I don't think there's any reason it should be when Wales was publishing his stories.
They were just novels or romances or whatever.
And the science fiction was in a sort of ghetto, quote, ghetto for a generation.
I think this was partly due to the fact that he's published in pop magazines and people look down on the popes.
I think we're sort of getting over that.
But it's still a category, a publisher's category, like Westerns or got the gothics and love romances or whatever.
And that means that if Don Wilhelm or Judy Lynn Del Ray or someone else packages a book in a recognizable science fiction package, it'll sell enough copies to make a profit.
But it's a limited profit because it is shelved in the science fiction racks and the stands and the general public doesn't see it.
So people who get to be best sellers, successful people like Goni Vani Gutt and so forth,
tend to want to get the science fiction label off their stories when they begin to sell enough copies.
But I've never reached that stage myself. I'm proud to have mine called science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thanks for watching.